1) You are at war!  However, the enemy country is made up of many islands, 
   and that makes it quite difficult to mount a sustained attack on their 
   bases and supplies.  This is where you come into the picture.  Although a
   large scale attack would prove to be quite deadly to your forces as the 
   enemy would be able to use weapons of mass destruction on your groups of 
   forces on the islands.  However, by using bombing runs on the factories 
   that produce these deadly weapons, and by using these tactics your 
   country can gain the upper hand.  You have been selected to make these 
   attacks, so it is just you in your attack helicopter with an aircraft 
   carrier as support for you as you take the evil country down, starting 
   with your mission of Raid On Bungeling Bay!

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------Controls-----------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

2) This section will give you the controls that will lead you to victory 
   over the hated enemy!


D-Pad...: The movement of your helicopter are completely dependent upon this
          section of the controller.  By putting full pressure on the UP 
          direction, your helicopter will fly ahead at full speed.  By using
          DOWN, your helicopter will slow down, and then start to reverse if 
          you continue to hold DOWN (otherwise the helicopter will begin to 
          hover).  LEFT and RIGHT control which way your whirly bird will 
          turn when in the air.

SELECT..: No apparent use.

START...: Pauses/unpauses the game.

B Button: This Button will deliver your high payload bombs into the 
          factories below.  You get 9 of these ordinances assigned to your
          helicopter, and this supply can be replenished on your aircraft 
          carrier.

A Button: This Button will fire off your machine guns (hehe, more like pea 
          shooter) at the enemies.  You can only have one bullet in the air
          at a time, but they are unlimited.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
----------------------------Aircraft Carrier--------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

3) This section will look at your Aircraft Carrier, as well as the info it 
   sends to your helicopter as well as it's refueling duties.


                            o-------------o
                            | WHAT IS IT? |
                            o-------------o

The Aircraft Carrier is your base of operations for the "Raid On Bungeling
Bay".  It has numerous purposes, so you should protect it at all costs.


                          o------------------o
                          | WHAT DOES IT DO? |
                          o------------------o

It's most important duty is restocking your bomb supply and repairing all
damage received while flying your bombing runs on the enemies weapon 
factories, but it also sends you data such as bombs remaining and damage
ratings on your helicopter.

The "D" represents damage, and the triple digit number beside the "D" is 
the rating of damage you have sustained.  You can continue to fly safely 
until that number enter the triple digit area (100 or over), at which point
you will enter a tail-spin.  

The "B" represents bombs remaining, and it will show a maximum of 9 at any 
time.  The "F" represents factories remaining, which are your primary target
to attack by using your bombs to disable and destroy them.

The Arrow pointer shows which direction is the shortest path to your 
Aircraft Carrier.  Use this to get back there whenever you need to.

To achieve this restock and repair, you must land on the Aircraft Carrier as
it forges forward between the enemies islands.  Come in slow (almost at a 
near stop), press the A Button to land, and when the damage and bomb 
information they send you has been reset to pre-flight conditions (000 
damage and 9 bombs), press the A Button to take to the skies once more.


                o-------------------------------------o
                | IS THE AIRCRAFT CARRIER INVINCIBLE? |
                o-------------------------------------o

No, it is most vulnerable as it has only one defense, your helicopter 
piloting skills.  Read the "Alert!" section for specific details on how to
best defend your ship of origin.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------Enemies------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

4) This section will review the behaviours of the enemy units, their damage
   dealing abilities, and the points received for killing them.


                            o--------------o
                            | PATROL BOATS |
                            o--------------o

These guys are just watching for your helicopter so they can raise the Jet
Fighters to come to their aid out over the water.  They have low grade 
anti-aircraft shots that do 1 damage per successful hit.  Their projectiles 
are invisible, so dodging them on purpose is not possible.  These beings will
also keep an eye out for your Aircraft Carrier, and they will report the 
location to the Jet Fighters.


                       o------------------------o
                       | RADAR SATELLITE DISHES |
                       o------------------------o

These installations have on purpose: to alert Jet Fighters to scramble when
you are spotted on radar.  They do not fire any projectiles, so they can not
damage you, and even if they are destroyed, they will be rebuilt rather 
quickly by the enemy (in the same area too, so try to avoid them).


                                o------o
                                | TANK |
                                o------o

A red tank will often patrol the island, waiting for your helicopter to 
attempt to attack the installations there.  It does not shoot visible 
projectiles, so purposeful dodging is not an option, and it deals about 2
damage points her shot landed.


                           o----------------o
                           | DEFENSE CANNON |
                           o----------------o

A powerful turret that can shoot in all directions, on almost every island 
in the area.  They tend to be more concentrated on the shores of islands (as
first defense) and around weapons factories (they will be grouped in twos 
for extra safety).  They will fire combustible shells at your helicopter, 
that explode after a certain amount of time away from the cannon.  If your
helicopter is caught in this explosion, your helicopter will receive around 
30 points of damage!  They are far less accurate the higher your rate of 
speed, so just fly around them as you pick them off.


                            o-------------o
                            | JET FIGHTER |
                            o-------------o

These guys will not be involved in the fight until your helicopter has been
positively identified by their defense network,  They will then take off on 
the runways of the island under siege, which means you can try and pick them
off then.  Once they are in the air, they will fly fast routes trying to 
sneak into attack your helicopter with massive missile blasts.  When these
connect, you will receive about 30 damage points per hit.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------Island Bases----------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

5) This section will discuss the bases defenses, their toughness, and how 
   many bombs are required to take a base out of commission.


                         o--------------------o
                         | PERIMETER DEFENSES |
                         o--------------------o

These will have a few Patrol Boats and Radar Satellite Dishes for you to try 
and destroy/sneak past as you go to find weapon factories.  You may also see
some Defense Cannons on the shores to trying to shoot your whirly bird down.
It is best to try and find a more secluded path to the factories, so appraoch
cautiously.


                         o--------------------o
                         | SECONDARY DEFENSES |
                         o--------------------o

Tanks and Defense Cannons form the next line of defense as these guys will
relentlessly fire at you.  Take care of them quickly and find your target
with great speed or you have to face...

 
                        o---------------------o
                        | SCRAMBLING DEFENSES |
                        o---------------------o

These are made up of Jet Fighters who will relentlessly swoop in to try and
knock you out of the sky.  keep in mind that they can be grounded by shooting
the planes on the runway before they can get airbourne and become a threat.  
All of this is to defend...  


                         o-------------------o
                         | WEAPONS FACTORIES |
                         o-------------------o

Position yourself over the factory when the enemy noise is minimal, and drop
your bomb payload to knock that factory out.  If you run out of bombs, go
back to your Aircraft Carrier to get more and return to finish the job.  
Keep in mind that the Bombs are more effective if spread out a little bit 
over the entire factory as opposed to just bombing one section of it 
repeatedly (you know you are close to victory when the lights shut off in 
the factory cause you knocked out the electricity!).

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------Alert!-------------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

6) This section will give some procedures to follow when this potentially
   disastrous event begins.  


                        o---------------------o
                        | WHAT IS THAT NOISE? |
                        o---------------------o

That noise is your Aircraft Carrier calling you back to base as it is under
bombing runs by Jet Fighters!


                        o---------------------o
                        | HOW DO I GET THERE? |
                        o---------------------o

Use the Arrow pointer to home in on your Aircraft Carrier's location.  
Whichever direction the arrow is pointing is the direction you must go to
find your Aircraft Carrier.


                      o-------------------------o
                      | HOW SHOULD I DEFEND IT? |
                      o-------------------------o

The best way to defend it is to first start flying a slower speed as you
wait for a Jet Fighter to attack, at which point you should give chase at 
full speed to destroy it.  Then return to do the same to the rest of the 
attackers.  You may also wish to hover over your Aircraft Carrier as you 
fire bullets as you turn to fend off approaching fighters.


           o----------------------------------------------o
           | WHY SHOULD I CARE ABOUT MY AIRCRAFT CARRIER? |
           o----------------------------------------------o

besides the fact it is your ally and piece of hardware, it is your home 
base from which you fly your missions.  If you lose your Aircraft Carrier,
you will have nowhere to repair damage OR refill your bomb suuplies (thus 
making your missions impossible to complete!).  Definitely make sure to save
it.

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------Strategies-----------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

7) This section will give you a few combat strategies to use so you will 
   succeed in your endeavours.


a) Kill all Patrol Boats and Radar Satellite Dishes you see.  This may be 
   annoying, but if you knock out their spyware, their ability to bring 
   masses of Fighter Jets down on your helicopter and Aircraft Carrier.

b) If you have been discovered by the watcher enemies (Patrol Boats and 
   Radar Satellite Dishes), try to find the runway on the island.  If you do 
   so before any Jet Fighters are airbourne, look for them attempting to 
   take off.  This is when you should blast them as they are moving slow and
   they can not fire at you.

c) Destroy all the Defense Turrets you can as you find Weapons Factories.  
   This will not only make your approach safer, but it will also make 
   stopping over the factories that much easier and safer.

d) Hovering directly over the Weapons Factories is the best way to assure 
   your bombs of making connection with every single one.

e) After bombing a factory, always make it a point to immediately return to
   the Aircraft Carrier because you will not have enough bombs left to 
   destroy another factory without re-supplying anyway.    

----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------Final Word-----------------------------------
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

8) As is the usual, this walkthrough is copyright property of Brian P. 
   Sulpher, 2004.  The only website, group, person, etc. to have access to
   post it is www.gamefaqs.com, www.ign.com, www.retronintendo.com, and 
   www.honestgamers.com.  You must ask for permission before posting this, 
   as doing so without consent is a violation of international copyright 
   law.

   If you liked it, hated it, have anything to add, then please E-mail me at
   briansulpher@hotmail.com.  You can also contact me through MSN messenger
   through the same E-mail address.

   A fun little game that may be a little poor graphically, but definitely a 
   game not lacking in coolness for design.  A fun one to play for a bit, 
   and I hope that this FAQ comes in handy for whoever might need some help
   with maximizing your fun in the gaming experience.