R-Type! A shooter that can be quite unforgiving, and is a member of one of my
favourite series. My actual experience with R-Type was latent, I always wanted
to play Super R-Type, but we were always renting newer games. When I finally
got my hands on that game, I was hooked! So I've come full circle to this game
and the Master System because I feel they need some love.

While R-Type has discrete levels, it can still be quite challenging at first.
While learnign the ways of the stages certainly helps, the games can still
frustrate. So before you dive into an R-Type game, be prepared for the rough
spots.

And this particular game, on the Master System it manages to stay beautiful and
at times hard. The bosses are cool, the music is nice. It's everything I've
come to expect from the series. So, get ready. Blast off and strike the Evil
Bydo Empire! 

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                                 R2: Basics                                 |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

D-Pad: Move R-9
Button 1: Shoot
Button 1: (Rapid): Rapid Fire
Button 1: (Hold): Charge shot
Button 2: (Force Device Attached): Detach Force Device
Button 2: (Force Device Detached): Pull Force device back in.

R-Type can be a fairly unforgiving series, but if you learn the stages you will
do much better than were you to make a blind run at it (uninspired, of course).
While this game is simpler than the sequels in the path respect, it can still
help. Basically, survive until the boss of the the stage, deal with it, and
continue.

When you run out of lives, you will get to continue, you start with three
credits, the one you are playing on and two in reserve.

Points are shown at the end of the stage, as usual you get extra lives from
points. The lives are awarded at the end of the stage, when points are tallied.
Points for lives are 50000, 150000, 250000, 400000, and 600000.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                                 R3: Items                                  |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

*Your first orb will get youa  Force Device.

Blue Orb: Grants the Reflecting Laser

Orange Orb: Grants the Antiland Laser

Red Orb: Grants the Antiair Laser

Bit: R-Type's option. Fires shots along with the R-9 and damages enemies on
contact. Maximum of two, fly in formation with the ship. One above, one below.

Speed Up: Increase R-9's speed. Two is the amount I'd recommend.

Missile: Shoot missiles that fire straight unless there are enemies nearby. The
missiles seek out enemies with moderate efficiency.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                              R4: Force Device                              |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

The Force Device is crucial to your victory. It lets you use the advanced beams
and can be used as an extension of the R-9 without being near the ship. You can
fire the device with the second button, and it can be used to defeat enemies
even by touch.

**************
R4.1: Alone
**************

When away from the R-9, the Force Device fires when you do. This greatly
increases the possibel spread of your fire.

One Orb: Fires straight ahead
Two Orbs: Fires up/down on diagonals. (two way)
Three Orbs: Fires up/down on diagonals and up/down on verticals. (four way)

You can pull the force device with the button 2 for a bit before it connects
with you. Use the pull to move it into position.

The force device damages enemies just by touching them, launch it into a stream
of oncoming enemies, or back into one. It can keep you coevred while you go on.

Launch the device at some bosses to score rapid damage.

The Force device must be detached in order for you to attach it to the back or
front of the R-9.

**************
R4.2: Attached
**************

When attached, the Force Device allows you to use the attacks given by orbs:

Reflecting Laser: Two lasers fire out on diagonals and bounce off surfaces. One
laser flies straight forward.

Antiair Laser: Large, ringlike stream. While it is wide, this is the least
range. However, it is powerful.

Antiland Laser: Two flame like blasts travel evrtically (one up, one down) and
travel along the surfaces. A standard shot allows you to have some forward
sttack.

These are shot backwards when the Force Device is attached to the back.

The force device is a shield. It can blcok some enemy attacks, and damage
others. Choose the side you place it on for defensive purposes as well as
offensive.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                               R5: Walkthrough                              |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

I use FD in place of Force device at times.

Control-F Coding:

R-Type Stage X: RSX
So RS1 takes you to stage 1.
*RSS takes you to the secret stage section of the guide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 1
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS1

Begin by charging your shot, there will soon be some Red ships that are shaped
sort of like hearts with their wingspan seen from above. They move more or less
ina  sinusoid as they approach, taking an occasional shot. After your initial
charged shot, spray the formations as they come a bit too quickly to keep up
the charging. Afterwards, some orange pods that don't shoot, but can change
direction midflight, and an orange walker on the ground. The walker can shoot,
but it is no large threat.

You'll fight more of the red heart wings and then eventually, you should find a
POW armour. Destroy that and get the blue ball it leaves, the force device will
arrive, attach it to the front of your ship for now. Shortly after getting the
FD, you'll find a green power armour. As you fight it, a blue walker will come
onto the screen, this is a fairly dangerous enemy so keep an eye on it.

You will soon come to a passage, some enemies will approach you. They're grey
and just fly into the passage towards you, they kind of look like robotic
aliens of some sort. You could charge your blast to take out a nice chunk at
first, or launch the FD ahead. A spray of shots will take care of them, so you
don't really need to be fancy. After the swarm, shoot the turrets on the floor
and ceiling. They shoot a simple shot, but it comes fast so take them out.

As you enter the area where the turrets were, you will comescross two POW
armours. One will give you a speed up item, the other will give you a blue orb
that will upgrade your FD's independent firing capabilities and grant you the
use of the reflecting laser. This si a very useful power that you should put to
use immediately to learn its uses and take out the turrets on the ceiling. Get
ready for the rotating pods.

When you enter this rotating line of orbs, they will fire at you. You can
destroy them, but if you destroy the orb with the blue dome, all will be
destroyed. It's quite likely that even if you destroy this dome that there will
be a large amount (relatively speaking) of shots in the centre with you. Use
your FD to absorb most of them.

As you progress, there are two more POW armours. One will give you the antiair
laser, another a bit. Taking care to avoid the turrets, ships, and walkers
collect at least the bit. If you don't want the limited spread of the antiair
laser, thendon't get this. However, the upgrade to your force device will be
valuable against the boss. The bit offers a little more firepower and slight
protection to the top. Keep gunning and you'll get a missile right before
entering the tighter passage.

Through the passage, you will come across some red power armours and turrets on
the ceiling. Antiair will complicate things, but the turrets shouldn't be too
much of a problem. Pound the red power armours with antiair lasers to dispatch
them quickly, or pick up the blue orb and use the reflecting laser. They shoot
their bullets very quickly forward, and launch the same kind of missiles as the
blue walkers. They're a fair threat so maybe charge your shot for the initial
hit.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 1
******************************************************************************

Krell is a pretty typical R-Type image, the large alien that dons many covers
and arts looking to all the world like a huge, irate fetus. But don't let that
fool you, Krell's not too tough but if you aren't ready it could surprise you.

Method 1:
If for some reason you want the Force Device attached or you lack it, you have
to wait for Krell to lower its tail, then fire off a few shots at the central
mouth (in the "stomach"). As soon as the mouth opens, fly up and out of the way
of the curving blast it shoots. This will eliminate you, regardless of where
you place the FD>

Method 2:
Ok, it's time to learn one of the tricks of dealing with R-Type bosses. Fire
the force device into the stomach of Krell, that central mouth. Start firing
and it should be damage from contact if not the shots. It will die very quickly
and so if it begins to move forward, don't worry too much about it, you're
likely to down it by then. Otherwise, just pull the FD a little closer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 2
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS2

This level is kind of grim looking, there appear to be corpses lining the floor
and ceiling. You'll soon see a POW Armour, it grants a Speed Up, take it if you
want/can handle the speed. You will see some movement amongst the corpses, sort
of like a shaking. A large, odd enemy comes out of the debris and scuttles up
the screen. They don't attack you outright, but plenty will come and so they
can take you by surprise if you don't pay attention.

Keep on destroying these and you'll eventually notice a swarm of little green
pods rocketing across the top portion of the screen. Now, pay attention here
because it is possible to get a POW Armour that gives you an orange orb. The
antiland laser is very useful here, it can do great damage to the corpse
dwellers while they're still underground. However, you're horizontal firing
capabilities are severely crippled. That shouldn't matter much here, however,
where anything that can fly into your front will be destroyed by the force
device anyways.

One thing you should keep note of here are the jellyfish, they follow you
around with a fair bit of determination. Don't let them kill you over an orange
orb. The pods on the ground launch the Jellyfish, or rather some kind of plasm
that takes the shape of the Jellyfish to pursue you. As long as you keep firing
at corpse dwellers and take care around the green pods, these jellyfish should
be no large problem.

When the green pods stop, you'll find a POW Armour with a blue orb. Take it if
you prefer. Destroy the segments on the large snake that passes by, this stage
is short and this snake is part of the boss. The snake will twist around the
screen for a while. Don't be afraid to let it loop around you. When the ground
gives way, you are approaching the boss.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 2
******************************************************************************

Gomanda is a pretty ugly boss, just the way I like them. It has an eye at the
top which is its weakness. You have a number of ways you can deal with this
dude.

Method 1:
Fire at the eye from above with the reflect laser or antiland laser. Keep more
or less up and to the left of it, so you can avoid the snake that ducks in and
out of the boss' orifaces. Now, this takes a considerable amount of time, but
the advantage lies in being able to dodge the snake.

Method 2:
Launch your FD above the eye, then pull it in. As you take it in, head down so
that it lands beside the eye. Alright, if the FD is to the left of the eye then
start firing. If it's to the right of the eye, it will damage the eye by
touching it. Keep firing anyways if your FD can fire at a level to hit the
snake passing over above. If Method 1 has any good points, Method 2 trumps
them.

Just keep in mind:

-The snake can launch a spread of shots, though these are relatively easy to
deal with.
-Cripple the snake's abilities by destroying its body segments.
-Every time it goes inside Gomanda, the segments are restored.
-You can tell which tube the snake will exit by the shaking of the tube.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS3

An old R-Type standby, the mega battleship. That thruster on the back, guarded
by turrets - take it out first and foremost. It can launch white energy balls
at you. So take this out, around two POW Armours will present you with orange
orbs in the meantime. These are quite useful for this stage, consider them.

After the jet falls, or before even, you will ask yourself: Am I going up, or
am I going down? Well, I'm going to answer that for you. While it looks like
you can go above the ship, there's plenty of turrets up there afterall and you
can destroy the hull, you will eventually be scrolled to your demise - you
can't get past that first big protrusion, so head down.

Destroy the turrets on your way, and the five cannon turret as well. The
5-cannon may look formidable, but the shots are much easier to predict than a
standard turret. Take the antiair laser if you want to destroy parts rapidly,
but remember that range will be severely compromised. Turrets on the bottom
of the ship in alcoves may be inaccessible. You may have to put the FD on your
back to hit them, or just brace yourself for the dodge.

The first chunk of the chip you blow off, kind of a rectangle with rounded
corners, will reveal two turrets. The next chunk, it's in a corner, will reveal
a five cannon turret. Maybe avoid this and concentrate total fire on the
thrusters up ahead. Otherwise, you may get hit by a jetting blast. After the
thrusters, you'll be approaching another area that seems to take damage. Fire
on the hull. Attach the Force Device to your back.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 3
******************************************************************************

Well, this boss is kind of a 'core' in the shooter sense of the word. But first
thing's first. With the force device on your back, destroy the power turrets.
These things fire fairly large shots that while slow, occupies a bit more space
than a standard shot so they still should be considered.

There's going to be POW armour with a blue orb from the right, near the extreme
right tip of the ship. Do not let this hit you, and take the reflecting laser
if you want. Keep the device on your back and destroy the turrets behind you.
Take out some of the hull and the five cannon turret if you want. As for the
core, if it is sticking out, stay away from its spray attack. Once the turrets
are incapacitated, you can take on the core. You may think, "gee, why don't I
just lead my FD in here and run?" Well, the other turrets regernerate. You can
try to let the force device take it out, but I'd suggest waiting for the core
to retract and expose the red dome portion. Fire at this and the ship will be
destroyed surprisingly quickly.

You see, if you try to escape the ship and the FD doesn't work its magic fast
enough, you're left helpless against the turrets and could be shot in the back.
But if you can work with that, then go ahead and knock yourself out, just don't
blow yourself up!

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 4
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS4

Odd looking ground here, green mossy patches on metallic structures. As you
approach the stage, you'll notice a few small ships. These "weavers" lay down
litle circles taht form "webs" or lines of circles taht you must shoot through.
Destroy the ship to stunt the webs, and the webs are best taken out with your
forward shots.

Entering the floor and ceilinged area, the weavers keep coming. There are also
a number of enemies from Stage 1 here, a few walkers, red ships, and grey
drones. Pay the most attention to the weaved lines, but keep some distance
between the R-9 and the enemy. Just keep firng, in other words. They still need
to be destroyed. Alternate beween hitting the weavers and the other enemies.
There are two POW armorus in here: speed up and antiair. Watch out for orange
ships curving in from the top and centre soon.

Exiting the area, head to the right and stay near the ground. Four weavers
quickly crisscross. Attach the FD to your back. Destroy the red ship that
appears to the left, it will pursue you otherwise. Okay, this section gets
tricky, there are tons of weavers. Destroy the walkers walking across the webs
from the left. Now, pay attention to the POW armours. The first, near the top,
is a bit. Soon, below, is a missile. the next two, an orange orb and speed up.
I'd stick with red, but take it if you want.

Mainly in that section watch out for walkers. There's a few grey drones and
red ship IIs, but they don't pose as much of a threat as the walkers or webs.
Alright, the weavers are a good target too, but they come too fast and too
often to really move around to destroy them. Take out the webs you need to,
and always try to stay out of their paths.

After this area, you'll see weavers making vertical lines. Alright, begin to
plow through this. Beware of the grey drones and red ship IIs that appear here.
While a back-attached force device can help you out here, it's not necessary.
I'd recommend it, however. During the section, there's three POW armours:
speed up, red orb, and blue orb.

*******************
  Special Notice!
*******************

Keep an eye out in this area, if you want to go to the Secret stage. There are
two columns hanging down after a short gap, and the distance between these two
columns is a few R-9 lengths. If you fly backwards into the left columns, you
will be teleported to the secret stage.

Alright, there's just a few more weavers. There will also be some grey drones
from behind. Don't underestimate them. They can fire now, or if they could
ebfore their firing is more apparent.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 4
******************************************************************************

Monpaira can take you by surprise, it is a boss composed of three sections. It
also arrives from the left, so be prepared. As you move around it, it will be
firing at you. Fire on the green domes as it splits and comes across the
screen.

A few notes:
-From behind, it can fire a laser from two of the segments.
-It's shots come often, so don't squeeze into a space too tight between a
segment and the screen boundaries.
-When it splits and reforms, make sure you don't get hit. It's a slow process,
but you never know what can happen.
-Don't take your attention off the immediate threats - the segements closesr to
you. Otherwise, they could fire at you and you'd never see it coming!

Alright, fire the force device into the boss and fire your cannon. Or, if you
have the reflecting laser, it can be a little easier to it witht he device
attached. Keep your distance from the boss and eventually the force device will
begin to destroy the segements. If you want, attach the FD as a defense against
shots when passing by the boss.

When a segment is destroyed, the boss speeds up. But keep at it, it'll go down
eevntually. When you're down to the last segment, just keep a distance from it.
It will be quiet fast so you need room to react.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 5
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS5

An organic stage with cilia floors and ceiling, and what looks like arteries in
the background. Soon after you start, a long enemy that looks like a centipede
will arrive. These "gut centipedes" are vulnerable to shots to the head. After
a few hits, they split, spraying their segments.

The first centipede is pretty pedestrian in its spray, but the second uses a
radial, wide range spread. Fire at the scattering segemnts to destroy them. You
will then find a POW armour, it drops a speed up. There is then another POW
armour, it also drops a speed up. A centipede comes straight down from the
ceiling, decapitating this will cause the segmensts to curve along by their own
volition. The next centipede gives a radial spray of segments.

After a short while of not fighting enemies, there will be two centipedes, both
give the radial spray. There will also be some orange bats soon. These enemies
curve around the screen and fire at you. They aren't in a formation, which I
suppose makes them a challenge here because the shots won't be coming from
some localized area. Even still, they aren't too bad. There are also some laser
ships, they fly straight forward and launch a straight laser. Just before them
is a POW armoru with an orange ball, this will help you out fighting them, if
you want to destroy them. Afterall, a head on battle is not recommended.

*Orange bats are fast and their shots are disguised against the red background,
so keep a keen eye out for them! Not to mention they follow you, they are a
very dangerous enemy*

Ok, up next are two centipedes travelling along the ceiling and floor. You do
not need to destroy these. Next up are the laser walls. You will need to move
around these large enemies, avoiding their lasers. Take note that there are a
few grey drones and orange bats here. There are also some POW armours, dropping
missiles and speed ups.

Leaving the laser wall brigade, a Centipede comes from the ceiling, this is a
radial spreader. Don't try to have it curve around you, an Orange bat will come
from the top left and laucnh attacks at you. All that is left in the stage is a
POW armour with an orange orb and the boss.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 5
******************************************************************************

Alright, Kraken is covered in these orboid things. Fire at the coverings. Or if
you want to destroy them really quickly, fire your force device into the mass
and start firing. Most of them will be wiped out. When the core is exposed, it
will go down quickly. Just watch out for the orboids that come off after you,
they return to Kraken soon after but come suddenly. The thing is, this boss
looks quite intimidating, but if you use your FD correctly, it's a total
pushover.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 6
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS6

Alright, this stage can be a true pain. It starts out with some wall hugging
enemies that move around on the walls and fire at you. There are also
containers flying around that will crush you upon contact. Towards the start
a POW armour will give you a blue orb.

Avoid these, you will come to an area with multiple tunnels, take the top. A
container will pass through the middle, then one though this top tunnel. Go
under this container, then get ahead of that gap ina ceiling as a container
will be coming down from here. Shoot the walkers up next then let the container
enemies loop around you until there's clear passage in the bottom right, or the
upper right.

You just ahve to make it through either tunnel, stay ahead of the containers
and possibly have your FD on your back. Hug the walls and fire backwards, you
should get through if you keep ahead.

Heading into the area with the columns next, avoid the container coming down by
hugging thr right wall. Keep the R-9 close to the top of the first column while
staying centred on it. A container comes up from that gap, and one will go down
the passage you entered from. You can stay below both if you stay here. Take
out the wall hugger and get ready to fight a ton of Walkers. You will see where
they're coming from, so launch your FD backwards here. This will defeat most of
them. If you don't want to do this, at least have the device on your back. _Or_
you could just fire backwards at them if you ahve the reflecting laser. There's
a POW armour with an orange orb here if you want it.

Right, you're entering another container area. The reflecting or antiland laser
would be useful here, to hit the wall huggers on the horizontal walls. In that
little room formed by walls, there is a POW armour with a blue orb, if you want
it of course. Duck in and get it, but be warned: a container will come rapidly
from the right, intot he alcove. So wait that container out then fly down into
the passage it came from. That means it could be wise to destroy the POW armour
after it leaves the alcove.

As you go through the package, two containers move forward at the top and
bottom of the screen. When they hit the wall they reverse direction. However, a
container will also come from the right, essentially in the middle of these two
as they head to the right. Stay ahead of one of the rebounding containers,
squeeze in over or under the newcomer, then get back in the centre to avoid any
further rebounds by the top/bottom containers.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 6
******************************************************************************

Ah, a boss. Finallya  break from those containers! Not quite...

This isn't technically a 'boss,' more like an enemy rush of containers. There
are a few wallhugers, and a speed up POW armour, but the containers are your
big problem.

Alright, stay out of the centre when the battle begins. A container apears
immediately. Containers follow this kind of path: head down, then left or right
and up into the room to the left of the container entry point and circle it.
Then, they leave the screen. If you have the reflecting laser, fire it without
relent.

Method 1:
Basically, you need to outlast them. This is possibly the hardest 'boss' in the
game for your first run through, so just be patient! Wait until one appears,
then follow it around, firing the whole time. Pass into centre when you arrive
in the room _after_ a container has started its descent into the tunnel. If you
are too impatient, you're going to be smashed. Follow them around and keep this
up and the stage will soon end.

Method 2:
Sweet spots, like the bottom right corner. This may take a few tries to master
so that your ship doesn't just explode from a wall collison, but take out the
wall huggers then get into the bottom right corner. Get as close to the floor
and wall as you can. The containers will pass you right by. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 7
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS7

Stage begins in sort of a wrecked mechanical area, heart wings come from that
tunnel you're heading for. There's also a POW Armour, drops a speed up.

As you pass the tunnel, the stage deisgn isn't too complicated, it's just that
the enemies are hard. Grey drones can come from behind you, and there's plenty
of walkers. There's one orange ship line from the top, and an orange, boot or
shoe shaped enemy. this flies, hits walls then moves around them. It also fires
at you. It's a small target, but right now the other enemies are quite a bit
more threatenting.

Keep going, some more walkers and a boot. You'll come to a place with multiple
short paths. The middle will have a POW armour with an antiair laser. Use your
own discretion, a reflecting laser is best in tight spaces like these, but you
may want the power. Anywas, attach your FD to your back and destroy the walkers
and drones coming from behind.

Keep it on your back until after the walkers that come from behind shortly past
the blue walker. Switch it to your front to get those walkers coming along the
ground from the right. Keep it there, shoot walkers and drones. Two lines of
orange ships come from the top, you can more or less bypass these if you keep
to the bottom.

Keep the FD on your front, yes there are a load of blue walkers here but you
should be able to avoid their shots until you can get a clear shot at them.
Besides, there's a ton of heart wings coming up and you need the shielding
properties of the device. There's some domes on the top of the screen here,
junk underneath them, and a Green Power Armour to the right.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 7
******************************************************************************

Borunka is an interesting fight. From those opening domes, trash will fall
down, including wrecked enemies! Excuse me, but that is absolutely righteous!
But I digress, besides the various sizes of tarsh that will wall, these tall
parascope machines with blue "dome eyes" will raise out of the trash and fire
at you. A similar machine will appear in that passage to the right, it will
throw garbage at you.

The reflecting laser is _highly_ recommended here, and a bit will help defend
against the garbage. Just keep destroying the parascopic enemies and firing at
the big guy that appears on the right and eventually you will be allowed to
pass. On to the final stage!

One final note: It drops discarded POW armours! These drop red and blue orbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                   Stage 8
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RS8

Black background, and organic ground. The stage begins with these little green
alien dudes flying at your ship. I higly suggest reflecting or antiland for now.
The aliens come from many directions, but always from the floor/wall. So don't
falter or you will be struck down.

The first two POW armours are an orange orb and speed up. Soon, you'll face a
vortex-like enemy flying around the screen. This cannot be destroyed. Keep an
eye out for aliens, but especially watch this so that you aren't taken down.
Soon: two POW armorus giving blue and red orbs. Well, get them regardless if
you need to upgrade your force deivce. You'll be at the boss now and you should
use the force device as a detachment.

******************************************************************************
                                  Boss 8
******************************************************************************

Bydo is a brainlike, bearded creature with small arms (reltive to the size of
the head that is). It has a wall guarding it, fire at this until it opens then
launch the force device in. Keep on firing and _eventually_ it will die. It
will take a long time so don't give up. The force device should enter the mouth
of the brain behind the wall.

Alright, survival? More green aliens are flying at you, but they are easier to
defeat than the vortex enemies. Everytime King Bydo opens its mouth it launches
a vortex at you (up to four). Your survival rate becomes severely compromised
when there are multiple vortecies onscreen. Try to get your force device into
the mouth early, so you destroy Bydo more quickly.

Alright, watch how the vortecies move. They usually travel in circles, but can
change direction. They aren't a problem alone, but when there's a few and in
combination with green aliens theya re a real pain. So pay attention to how
they move and don't jump into their path.

After doing this for a while, the four vortecies will group and chase you. This
is not reallya  big problem, when they're all together they are much easier to
dodge. Bydo should blow up soon if you lobbed the FD into his chops.

Alright, watch the ending. Now, the game loops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    Secret
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
RSS

****If you die in this stage, you return to Stage 4****

This is the secret stage accessed from level 4. This is a unique looking stage
and it has a set of enemies all to its own.

As the screen scrolls, some new orange ships will come. They look like
crustaceans with their bodies and "claws." These Orange "crabs" behave like red
heart wings but are a little slower. Fight your way through the swarms and take
out the two POW armours. They drop Speed Ups.

Alright, there's some new enemies up next. From these long stalk-like, toothed
protrustions from the ground and ceiling come some amoeboids. Amoeboids just
ram into you, but there's a constant source of them. There's also some "green
turkeys" here, they look like the pre-cleaned turkeys you'd buy at the grocery
store. Green Eggs and Ham may have been surprisingly tasty, but Green Turkeys
are formidable. They take a pounding and can fire at you. Keep your FD in front
for this part of the stage.

Blast on through, take on the red fly. It lands then flies at you. While it
has some great endurance, it is not a difficult enemy. Next, the vines. Destroy
them before going between them, they fly up/down when you do. There are two
POW armours here: orange orb and speed up.

Alright, now the green ships come. When they stop, they launch a wide spread of
red shots. Brown Ships, which look like webbed claws come in along the floor
and ceiling, firing. When they reach the end of the screen, they go to the
middle then fly back off the right.

You will come to two stalks, they launch the amoeboids at you. There is a green
turkey here, and a few red flies afterwards. The green ships still persist, and
you will find two POW Armours: an orange orb and a speed up. Orange crabs are
found shortly after a few red flies. Fly above or below that large mass to the
right. It will shoot about five lasers at once.

******************************************************************************
                                  Secret Boss
******************************************************************************

This guy is a big head in a wall. Fire at it until the skeleton breaks. Alright
the fight begins, and it gets tough. Keep your Device on you and fire at the
boss until it's gone. The boss doesn't flash when you shoot it, so you just
keep firing. When it opens its mouth, it releases glowing bubbles. These bounce
aroudn the screen, but can be destroyed. Destroy and dodge bubbles and fire on
the boss. 

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                                R6: Enemies                                 |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

No official names are used here, with the exception of POW armour.

POW Armour:
After destroying it, it releases a powerup of some kind. They look like a pod
with legs and a red dome.

*********
Stage 1
*********

Blue Walker:
Fires missiles vertically, walks across surfaces. A danegrous enemy if you take
your eyes off it. It is essentially a cannon on legs.

Green Power Armour:
Shoots large blasts at you and can take a few hits. The biggest threat with the
green power armour is that it persists on the screen and can interrupt how you
respond to other enemies.

Grey Drone:
A grey robot with red eyes and a pulsing crest. They attack via ramming into
you in large swarms.

Orange Ship:
More orblike than the Red heart ship, kind of resembles Samus' gunship from the
Metroid series. They normally start in one direction, but can change partway
across the screen into a new path. They aren't really a threat, but even still
pay attention to their movement and possible shots.

Orange Walker:
Looks like the head of a robot, Blue dome on top. It walks across the ground
firing the occasional shot.

Red Heart-Winged Ship:
   _./'\   This is a pretty simple ship, that flies forward in a little
--/    /   sinusoid, often in line formations. While they do fire, the biggest
 ( )=====  threat is running into them as you try to deal with other enemies.
--\_   \   You can often take out a line or most of a line with one charged
    '\./   shot.

Red Power Armour:
A tough robotic enemy that fires volleys of bullets rapidly forward, and can
launch the same missiles as the Blue Walkers. They are a major threat, more so
in groups. I'd recommend keeping a distance from them, for proper reaction time
and just slamming them with a volley of shots. A charged shot to begin the
exchange might be in order.

Turret:
A turret that resides on the ceiling or floor, it si oraneg and grey. It fires
a single red shot at times, but this shot is fast so watch out.

*********
Stage 2
*********

Corpse Dweller:
Scuttles out of the debris on the floor and ceiling, they can take a pounding
but are largely benign. Beware of unexpected collisons and the fact that they
can absorb your shots meant for other enemies.

Green Pod:
Small pod that flies across the screen with considerabel speed. Only a threat
if it takes you by surprise or you have no force device.

Jellyfish:
Enemy that assumes a jellyfish type of body and chases after the R-9. They are
not very vicious, but are fairly determined and can cause problems with all the
other enemies onscreen. Pay the most attention to other enemies, and destroy
these as they approach or better yet, as they are formed.

Jellypod:
Enemy with considerabel stanima. Launches the plasm that forms the jellyfish
shape. It doesn't launch enough of the enemies to make them an essential target
but consider them noless.

*********
Stage 3
*********

For the most part, the stage is the enemy. There is the return of the turrets,
which are enemies elsewhere, but other parts of the ship won't be mentioned.
Mainly just the turret-type enemies.

Five Cannon Turret:
Shoots in five directions from each cannon. Easy to get between shots and
destroy it.

Power Turret:
Aims at you and fires a larger, slower shot.

*********
Stage 4
*********

You have the return of many Stage 1 enemies, including walkers, red ships, grey
drones, orange ships. Be prepared, here on out, to encounter old enemies in new
stages.

Grey Drones:
They can now shoot.

Red Ship II:
A ship that changes directions on right angles. It can also destroy webs by
touching them.

Weaver:
A very dangerous enemy - forms a "web" of little orbs that you must shoot
through. Destroy the ship to stop the web, the web can only be damged by your
forward shots.

*********
Stage 5
*********

Gut Centipede:
A large enemy that poses a threat by taking up much of the screen, but when hit
a few times in the ehad, the body segments scatter. The scattering segments are
vulnerable, but this is still the most dangerous state of the gut centipede. 

Laser Ship:
Flies straight forward, launching lasers. Easy to destroy, though head-on
attacks are not suggested.

Laser Wall:
Flies forward, covering a wide range. Fire lasers like the Laser Ships do. Just
avoid them.

Orange Bat:
Makes turns as it proceeds across the screen. Firing capabilities. Their turns
make them pursue you.


*********
Stage 6
*********

Container:
Don't try to eliminate these, it's a better idea to destroy them. Watch how it
moves and avoid it.

Wall Hugger:
Persists on walls firing to occasional shots. Not a hard enemy, but combined
with the containers it could result in your defeat.

*********
Stage 7
*********

Largely, the enemies here are pumped up heart wings, walkers, and grey drones.

Orange "Boot":
Moves forward, firing, until it hits a wall. It will then move around the wall.
A small target.

*********
Stage 8
*********

Green Alien:
Little guys that fly form the floor or ceiling. No threat alone, but could get
hectic in large numbers.

Vortex:
Bleu spinning enemies taht cannot be destroyed, move primarily in circles and
persist onscreen.

*********
Secret
*********

Amoeboid:
Simple enemies produced from the toothed stalks. They attack by touching you
though their attack is unorganized. The danger comes from the mass construction
of the little guys from the mouths of the stalks.

Brown Ship:
Looks liek a "webbed claw." Moves across the screen, changes elevation, then
back across and off the screen.

Green Ship:
Has a red "eye." It stops to fire a wide spread of shots.

Green Turkey:
Lays on a surface firing until taking off after you. It can take a beating.

Guardian Eye:
Large mass taht shoots five lasers. Avoid it.

Orange Crab:
Behaves like red heart wings though are a little slower. Look like crustaceans.

Red Fly:
Large insectoid enemy. IT lands, then flies at you. It will take a few hits.

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=
|                                 R7: Secrets                                |
-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=

Secret Stage:
In stage four, get to the area with vertical weavers have made a wall. There's
two columns hanging down after a short gap, and the distance between these two
columns is a few R-9 lengths. If you fly backwards into the left columns, you
will be teleported to the secret stage.

--The Next Two are eluded to in the manual:

Extra Credits:
Rotate the control pad clockwise on the credits screen, your credits will be
increasing in number, up to twelve.

Sound Test:
Rotate the control pad counterclockwise on the credits screen. Use the control
pad to scroll through the BGMs, and button 1 to listen to them. Use 00 to go
back to credits.
*To go beyond 17 in the sound test, you will need to hold button 2. This will
let you hear the sound effects.